---
title-prefix: "Blog"
nav_blog: true
---

# Using `uv` to package Golang applications

I love golang and I love uv.

Combining the two seems unlikely at a glance given the limited interop between Python and Go.
Moreover, the Go ecosystem is rich with top-tier developer tools (a domain in which Go excels).
To make matters worse, Go and Python have relatively divergent core beliefs as languages.
In short, Python has core standards it upholds while allowing downstream developers completely
the freedom to create the software they need within those standards.
In contrast, Go's core beliefs value simplicity and maintain quality by limiting the degrees of
freedom for problems involving maintaining the language.

For implementing business logic, Go's approach is fantastic.
Go is easy to learn, compile times are blazing, and feature deprecation in the language is a non-problem.
There is usually one way to do a thing and you're effectively  guarenteed it will do it well.
For packaging, on the other hand, I find this approach a bit limiting.

Packaging is user-facing.
Packaging effects how you solve a problem because the problem involves end-user behavior.
Those considerations could be the difference between a user installing the application or not.

## Issues with Go packaging

To be fair, Go packaging is 95% complete and is really good at what it does do.
I personally have an extremely low pain tolerance for software and an extra 100ms will bother me.
Part of the issue is that I intentionally use low-end hardware because UX and accessibility matter a lot to me.
For most use-cases, Go packaging is perfectly fine and requires minimal effort.
For me, I am willing to trade a bit of effort for the optimal user experience; I enjoy these things.
Also, this approach is compatible with Go's packaging which can be preferred if desired.

The majority of my complaints are really just, "Go doesn't have a canonical package repository."

1. Installing Go packages requires installing Go

2. Installing Go packages requires building them from source

3. Installing Go packages requires specific versions of Go installed

4. Managing Go packages lacks some reproducability features
